Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF)
Key facts
The CCHF virus causes severe viral haemorrhagic fever outbreaks.
CCHF outbreaks have a case fatality rate of up to 40%.
The virus is primarily transmitted to people from ticks and livestock animals.
Human-to-human transmission can occur resulting from close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected persons.
CCHF is endemic in Africa, the Balkans, the Middle East and Asian countries south of the 50th parallel north.
There is no vaccine available for either people or animals.

Transmission
The CCHF virus is transmitted to people either by tick bites or through contact with infected animal blood or tissues during and immediately after slaughter. The majority of cases have occurred in people involved in the livestock industry, such as agricultural workers, slaughterhouse workers and veterinarians.
Human-to-human transmission can occur resulting from close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected persons. Hospital-acquired infections can also occur due to improper sterilization of medical equipment, reuse of needles and contamination of medical supplies.

Signs and symptoms
The length of the incubation period depends on the mode of acquisition of the virus. Following infection by a tick bite, the incubation period is usually 1–3 days, with a maximum of 9 days. The incubation period following contact with infected blood or tissues is usually 5–6 days, with a documented maximum of 13 days.
Onset of symptoms is sudden, with fever, myalgia (muscle ache), dizziness, neck pain and stiffness, backache, headache, sore eyes and photophobia (sensitivity to light). There may be nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain and sore throat early on, followed by sharp mood swings and confusion. After two to four days, the agitation may be replaced by sleepiness, depression and lassitude, and the abdominal pain may localize to the upper right quadrant, with detectable hepatomegaly (liver enlargement).
Other clinical signs include tachycardia (fast heart rate), lymphadenopathy (enlarged lymph nodes), and a petechial rash (a rash caused by bleeding into the skin) on internal mucosal surfaces, such as in the mouth and throat, and on the skin. The petechiae may give way to larger rashes called ecchymoses, and other haemorrhagic phenomena. There is usually evidence of hepatitis, and severely ill patients may experience rapid kidney deterioration, sudden liver failure or pulmonary failure after the fifth day of illness.
The mortality rate from CCHF is approximately 30%, with death occurring in the second week of illness. In patients who recover, improvement generally begins on the ninth or tenth day after the onset of illness.

Diagnosis
CCHF virus infection can be diagnosed by several different laboratory tests:
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
antigen detection
serum neutralization
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay
virus isolation by cell culture.
Patients with fatal disease, as well as in patients in the first few days of illness, do not usually develop a measurable antibody response and so diagnosis in these individuals is achieved by virus or RNA detection in blood or tissue samples.

Treatment
General supportive care with treatment of symptoms is the main approach to managing CCHF in people.
The antiviral drug ribavirin has been used to treat CCHF infection with apparent benefit. Both oral and intravenous formulations seem to be effective.

Prevention and control
Reducing the risk of infection in people
Although an inactivated, mouse-brain derived vaccine against CCHF has been developed and used on a small scale in Eastern Europe, there is currently no safe and effective vaccine widely available for human use.
In the absence of a vaccine, the only way to reduce infection in people is by raising awareness of the risk factors and educating people about the measures they can take to reduce exposure to the virus.
Public health advice should focus on several aspects.
Reducing the risk of tick-to-human transmission:
wear protective clothing (long sleeves, long trousers);
wear light coloured clothing to allow easy detection of ticks on the clothes;
use approved acaricides (chemicals intended to kill ticks) on clothing;
use approved repellent on the skin and clothing;
regularly examine clothing and skin for ticks; if found, remove them safely;
seek to eliminate or control tick infestations on animals or in stables and barns; and
avoid areas where ticks are abundant and seasons when they are most active.
Reducing the risk of animal-to-human transmission:
wear gloves and other protective clothing while handling animals or their tissues in endemic areas, notably during slaughtering, butchering and culling procedures in slaughterhouses or at home;
quarantine animals before they enter slaughterhouses or routinely treat animals with pesticides two weeks prior to slaughter.
Reducing the risk of human-to-human transmission in the community:
avoid close physical contact with CCHF-infected people;
wear gloves and protective equipment when taking care of ill people;
wash hands regularly after caring for or visiting ill people.
